foreign
that
um
all human
Endeavors
attempts to create knowledge or achieve
anything are subject to error that
there's no such thing as a guarantee
that a project to create something new
will succeed
and in the case of knowledge
having got something that you consider
knowledge there's no such thing as a
foundation which if it's put on that
Firm Foundation is guaranteed to be true
no such thing as a foundation such that
if it's on that Foundation it's
guaranteed to be probable or anything
like that
what we have is
um on the other hand fallibilism also
says the very idea that we are subject
to error implies that there is such a
thing as being right that there is such
a thing as the truth
and that we can sometimes find some of
this truth
so fallibleism as I understand it is a
fundamentally optimistic positive
worldview
it's not although it's it says we are
subject to error
the closer you look at that for example
uh if you look at its negation which is
that there are some things that are
infallible some people that are
infallible that's that's all a very
pessimistic and and frightening kind of
take to have on the world
yes I am
um I think that that the kinds of
certainty that have been offered
traditionally
um I should say that this idea that we
can obtain certain truths Justified
truth authoritative truths and so on is
very old and has permeated both
philosophy and
and popular culture and everything for
thousands of years
um
the the sources that have always claimed
to offer this
have not only been factually wrong
because if you if you just think back to
all the different claims of
infallibility that have been made in the
past including within science you'll see
that that uh all of them were built on
sand in fact
um not only were they factually wrong
they also cause
tyranny either either intellectual
tyranny or actual political tyranny or
um
Karl Popper said that that said on one
occasion that
um
uh the the doctrine that the truth is
Manifest is the root of all tyranny
which when I first read it sounded
rather an exaggerated claim but I I've
come to think that that's true
everywhere where
uh somebody is uh claiming to be
entitled to do things against other
people's Wills
and not vice versa
there is somewhere a claim that the
knowledge by which under which they do
this is somehow authoritative
incontrovertible holy
um in some way
uh founded on
um infallible truth
or an infallible Source actually in
infallibility and infallibility are
properties of sources of ideas
um ideas themselves are either true or
false
I think one thing we need to look
uh to be comfortable with with uh not
having a foundation is that
uh when something is true it doesn't
need to be entrenched
um
criticizing it conceiving that it might
be false
actually strengthens one's understanding
of such a truth
so if you if you
um
uh
take an idea on board critically
then you will see why your criticisms
actually fail
and criticisms failing
is what we actually have that's that's
what we that's what is really possible
unlike Authority or infallibleism or
whatever
if you see that the why the criticisms
fail
then
um you can be comfortable that
not that it's true but that the Rival
ideas that you might have entertained
are false and if they aren't false
there'll be some reason that they aren't
false which you don't know yet which you
need to find VIA criticism again
and on the other hand if you are told
even perfectly true things
in a way that either prevents you uh
from criticizing or if if you've already
given up on criticism and don't
criticize yourself then you never really
understand why they're true even if they
are completely true so people again it's
it's uh commonplace observation that
people can
say pass an exam
in a subject get all the questions right
without everyone actually understanding
what they're saying so that when they
then come up with a practical situation
that's framed in a different way from
the way that an exam can be framed or a
way that they're accustomed to exams
Being Framed then they don't know how to
connect
what they learn to say with the actual
situation
no I've been very lucky that uh in my
research career I've I've never had to
take
um
position in the authoritative hierarchy
of either research or university I've
always just done research and the only
time I ever
give lectures or talks or something is
when I have something new to say so I I
so give a research seminar or something
like that but I've never given a
course
that was for credit to be
honest I although I think that
the authoritative structure of
universities isn't good
um
I I don't the reason I don't participate
is it's got nothing to do with getting
on my high horse it's just that I don't
like it it's boring
uh it's you know I want if I give a talk
I want
to know that that people are sitting
there came because they want to they
think that I might have something to say
that might interest them
rather than that they need the remaining
four points of this uh four credits in
order to make up their degree or
whatever it is
uh yes uh I I have I'm an optimist both
in the
everyday sense that I'm that I try and
look on the bright side but more
importantly
uh in the sense of what this means for
for uh for knowledge for the possibility
of growth and progress I always
regard
failure
or any kind of evil as being due to lack
of knowledge
and knowledge is obtainable we may not
be able to we can't obtain it just by an
act of Will by wanting it and we can't
ever be sure that we're going to attain
it but on the other hand is it is
attainable and we have the means namely
rational thought
which includes science but also includes
every other kind of rational endeavor
uh to to discover knowledge
there can't be a most foundational
Theory and it may seem odd that I should
say this
um
uh and I should say that the foundations
don't matter the starting point doesn't
matter even though my the whole of my
work my research is about trying to
discover the foundations of the laws of
physics for example and actually
the foundations of the laws of physics
if you go down deep enough other
foundations of things other than the
laws of physics as well the thing is
um that's not what foundations are for
uh there can't be an ultimate Foundation
if you have if you're if you have the
right motivation for seeking them
because if there were is a contradiction
if there were an ultimate Foundation the
question of why that is the ultimate
Foundation rather than some other thing
would never be answerable
so you as soon as you have something
you've discovered something that
underlies all the existing theories you
want to know why is it that and not
something else
and uh
the the
because
of fallibility
um this process
is good and it the fact that it can't
end is good
um we
whenever we solve something
thus removing an existing problem from
our problem situation we automatically
create more problems what's more they
are deeper problems for this very reason
so they're deeper and more interesting
problems than what we had before
I think the the there is a good and a
bad side to
the rise of the expert
um the the benign aspect is that
information is growing
exponentially and is indeed growing
faster than any human can can possibly
know
can possibly assimilate
now
um that's not important because what
um we ought to be doing is trying to
understand the world and delegating
information processing to Mindless
computers
or to other kinds of machines
so
it is possible to have a broad
perspective on knowledge
there's been a
sociological phenomenon in
the intellectual World in universities
and and in society generally
to
um
confuse these two things the the
information type knowledge and
understanding type knowledge so that
people are
trained
that people acquire their understanding
much too much via acquiring the
information
in some Fields like for example medicine
technology has for several decades not
caught up with the need for a lot of
information to be stored in a human
brain
and that for some people
and certainly more in other fields where
it wasn't so necessary has been at the
expense of having a broad understanding
that never was necessary and I think
that in the future
as the means of dealing with brute
information become more and more easy
and convenient
um people will no longer see themselves
as
holders of that kind of information and
people won't value other people who are
holders of that kind of information but
instead they will value in themselves
and in other people
explanatory information
which is not fragmenting
new knowledge is typically unifying
not fragmenting I mean fragmenting does
happen but typically and and a
fundamental new discovery unifies things
and therefore makes it easier to
understand a broader field
the distinction between beautiful and
ugly is objective is the only way we can
explain why
the only animals in nature that
appreciate flowers in the sense that
they are attracted by flowers are
insects and humans
now why is that
um
insects we know why it's because the the
insect species and the flower species
co-evolved their genes to make the
insects attracted attracted to the
flowers and the flowers attractive to
the insects that doesn't explain why
humans like flowers because most things
in the animal world that evolve to be
attractive to other animals we find
repulsive at least I do
and so you know
um
ugly animals
um whatever animals you don't like
first of all the theory only says that
are that Aesthetics can improve
not that it must and not that it has
now I think what's happened in art fine
art
um is a rather unusual thing uh which is
that the
um
Elite the Elites in fine art
went backwards for several decades
and rebelled against the very idea of
Truth or in what in their case Beauty
they rebelled against that so they they
um they reconceived art as being
intended either intended to serve a
practical purpose like socialist realism
or something or to shock people out of
their complacency or to
supersede something or to transcend
boundaries something like that rather
than to pursue Beauty
and if physicists had conceived of
physics in that way physics would have
gone backwards
um
so
um however
I don't agree with people who think that
civilization even in the sense of
art and Humanities and so on has gone
backwards because at the same time that
this was happening
the broader picture of art was actually
improving for a start an entire new art
form came into existence namely Cinema
and that is clearly has made progress
over the decades not just technological
progress but progress in the sense of
new ways of having new ways of something
being a movie new ways of of acting in a
movie and then television came along and
people were saying ah this will be the
death of the movie industry but the
exact opposite happened it on the one
hand enhanced and diversified the movie
industry and secondly created a whole
other art form in parallel with that one
namely television whether they overlap
but
um so I think
um
this is another of those situations
where
um the
the I I'm not sure if I can call it the
institutions in in this but but the the
broad momentum of
what
real people were doing was much wiser
than what the experts thought they
should be doing and what the experts
tried to do so the experts went haywire
for a while I think even that is now
um
I I won't say it's back on track but I I
think
that tendency has been successfully
criticized and there are people who
would like to go back to making actual
progress in regard to actual Beauty
I think that morality has been
progressing much more slowly than
progress in science but it's
nevertheless clearly been progressing if
you look back say to to 19th century
there was a situation in which a large
proportion or say in the early 19th
century most civilized people
uh had little or no objection to slavery
and very few people thought it was an
absolute abomination
whereas today the overwhelming majority
of people the overwhelming consensus is
that it's an absolute Abomination that
is a an objective change nobody can deny
that that change has actually happened
and I would argue that morally that
change has been for the better and it
hasn't just been
in these sort of big issue things you've
only got to watch and and over that
length of time scale you've only got to
watch say a television program from a
few decades ago uh watch early series of
Star Trek for example which was a
program that was consciously trying to
look ahead to see what society would be
like in the future and it's it's got
things which are like uh
um you remember an episode where there
was a female Captain who couldn't hack
it as Captain because she was a female
now we now not only is that now
Politically Incorrect they wouldn't be
sort of allowed to do it but which I
think by the way is a bad tendency
um but the reason but the thing I'm
pointing out is not that they wouldn't
be allowed to do it it's that it seems
ridiculous most people today consider
that theory ridiculous
so uh and that is also moral progress
so uh and this moral progress
happened in some societies and not
others
and that's a very important fact the
distinction the difference between the
Societies in which it did happen in
which it didn't happen are
the institutions that that deal with
ideas
the the weather ideas are
thought to be authoritatively derived or
criticized and uh the Societies in which
this progress took place were the ones
that were best that had best
institutionalized criticism
this this idea of a tradition of
criticism is is itself an almost
paradoxical thing like fallibilism
itself because
throughout human history people have
lived by tradition and tradition means
doing the same thing generation after
generation whereas criticism means
trying to change things moment to moment
let alone generation to generation but
nevertheless there is such a thing as a
tradition of criticism and it's the most
valuable thing in the world it's the
thing that all progress not only
political but everything else depends on
the the first couple of Seasons anyway
of house were a remarkable exploration
of epistemology it seemed to me uh you
know they're all sorts of
side things about this theories that
were fun like the portrayal of this
eccentric idiosyncratic character
although even then it they built the
personal quirks around the epistemology
so there was I remember there was an
episode where uh the world's leading
expert in something or other I think it
was tuberculosis or something was was
ill and said that he had tuberculosis
and Hal said no you don't and he said
why not well because
you've got atypical symptoms it's
um you've got a and and the expert said
no that's I've seen thousands of cases
of this you've only seen a handful of
cases in your whole career I've seen
thousands of cases and I know that this
disease can present atypically
and house said the fact that you've seen
thousands of cases is exactly why you're
not the right person to make this
decision
this is the gambler's fallacy you see uh
or is it the inverse gambler's fallacy
or whatever the the uh
the expert in thousands of cases of
tuberculosis who doesn't have a broad
understanding of
other diseases to match his
understanding of tuberculosis is going
to be terribly subject to bias
he's going to be trying to explain
things in terms of the things that he
knows
and if you're trying to explain an
unknown thing
um you want and in terms of your
expertise
you've got to be careful that the
expertise itself doesn't bias you
know every time house
makes this kind of decision he he
um allows for his own expertise
so he's oh whenever he has a theory he
wants to test it right away and you know
in the drama of the series that usually
involves risking the patient's life or
something you know just to make it more
exciting but but the logic of it is that
you form an explanation which is the
best available explanation at the time
um there are other explanations that are
not quite as good but are also viable
explanations in that they're not just
pulled out of a hat like for example you
know it's a disease we've never heard of
period now that could be true but it's a
bad explanation because it you could
always say that no matter what the
patient was so you have to that there's
a methodological rule that you don't
consider that kind of explanation
you've got to say in that case it could
be a disease we've never heard of that
does so and so and is testable
so then he has the best explanation and
then he immediately tests it and what
usually happens is that the test proves
him wrong
that's that's another
um
remarkable thing because usually when
a fictional uh story
wants to portray somebody as superhuman
you know to have super powers or
something
they overwhelmingly have to show the
superpower working
but with house
yes he usually gets it right eventually
but he almost never gets it right
immediately
and I've never seen that before
um
so that's that's why I I like the
epistemology in that series
that happened when I was an
undergraduate it was a tremendous Stroke
of Luck I think this must count as the
biggest Stroke of Luck in my whole
career
um I
um had
um well so I was interested in in
theoretical
um
the theoretical side of physics this is
before even becoming interesting
foundational side I was interested in
the theoretical side and therefore I
thought that I needed to fully
understand
the relationship between the
experimental and theoretical side of
physics because the theoretical side is
useless if it becomes disconnected from
experimental physics so not wanting to
do actual experiments myself because
every experiment I tried failed
um but nevertheless I wanted to
understand what the connection was so I
read Burton Russell because Bertrand
Russell was I think probably just about
the only philosopher I'd ever heard of
and he he wrote books about induction
and the scientific method and so on so I
read that and I thought that I
understood it and of course everything I
read that was completely wrong
um it was empiricism inductivism all
these horrible mistakes even
gave he wasn't a positivist but he gave
some Credence to positivist ideas as
well
but I wrote it all down uh to try and
clarify my ideas
and uh I showed it to my tutor now uh
you should understand that in Cambridge
terminology a tutor isn't a tutor it's
the I don't know what you call them in
America
um here in Oxford they're called moral
tutors
uh it's the person who's like your
contact person in the University who
like if you get into trouble that's who
you go to and he'll stand up for you uh
that kind of thing and you the the
practice was that you we would go to see
him uh the beginning of each term and at
the end of each term uh to say hello and
you know he would say do you have any
problems and that kind of thing so I
never had anything to say to him and so
I thought well I'll take this essay that
I wrote and I I sent him the essay
before I went to see him and I went and
I said yes did you read the essay you
know what do you think he was a
historian Charles Parkin was his name he
was a professor of History
um
uh and uh he said yes
um I read it you know it it seems all
right uh but this induction stuff hasn't
that all been disproved by that popper
chappie
and and I had only once before even
heard of Papa
and certainly had no intention of
reading him and and it's really amazing
that Charles Parkin even had the idea
that inductivism had been refuted by
Papa because that was
uh contrary to what the overwhelming
majority of philosophy professional
philosophers thought at the time they
thought that Papa was just ridiculous
for having claimed to solve the problem
reduction and to have an epistemology
that's superseded inductivism by the way
I think even today the majority of
philosophers would say that
um but in those days Papa was you know
just unheard of in in that kind of area
but somehow he had heard of it somehow
he told me about it somehow I got the
idea of getting a book of poppers out of
the library
and uh I was pulled over because the
standard of argument was simply Head and
Shoulders above anything I'd read in in
Bertrand Russell
so uh you know I in I with the hindsight
I could see that Bertrand Russell was
trying to kind of fob me off with things
that aren't really arguments
um whereas Papa was getting to grips
with the actual thing and finding yes
this part is right this part is wrong
this is why and so on
as far back as I can remember I I wanted
to be what I now call a physicist but
for some reason and I don't know how
this happened but for some reason I
didn't ever know what physics is until I
was 11.
and encountered a physics lesson in the
school that I entered at the age of 11.
um somehow it had passed me by that that
this thing
and as soon as I realized what that
subject is I knew that I wanted to be a
physicist
like I can more easily answer the
question if I wasn't allowed to be any
kind of scientist okay um then I would
be a film director yes but uh
think it's not a well-formed question in
the case of science because if I was
somehow prohibited from being a
physicist I would tend in that direction
as close as the prohibition allowed
as I think in fact I have done I mean
the way that I got to the particular
take on physics that I have
is by finding that that's where I tend
to
by trying to solve things